How do I define structural legs on X-minute bars without encoding micro noise as structure?
What a zigzag actually is

A zigzag is not “price moved X pips.”
A zigzag is alternating directional dominance.

In plain structural terms:

• A leg exists when one side controls successive swing highs and lows
• A reversal exists when the opposing side breaks structural control

That is different from a pip reversal threshold.

Structure on bars is visible as:

Higher high + higher low sequence → up leg
Lower low + lower high sequence → down leg

So if we want something non-threshold and non-noise-based, we define structure by swing logic, not distance.

Naive Methods

Method 1 — Fractal swing structure (structure, not pips)

Define a swing high:

Bar i is swing high if:
high[i] > high[i-1]
high[i] > high[i+1]

Similarly for swing low.

Then:

• Build a sequence of alternating confirmed swings
• A leg is from confirmed swing low to next confirmed swing high
• A reversal occurs only when a swing breaks the previous opposite swing

No pip threshold involved.

This tracks structure, not distance.

Method 2 — Break of Structure (BOS) tracking

Instead of “reversal ≥ X pips”, use:

Up leg continues as long as price does NOT break previous swing low.

So:

Up leg starts at a swing low
Track the highest high made
Leg only ends when a bar closes below the last confirmed swing low

That is structural invalidation, not pip magnitude.

This eliminates micro reversals entirely.

Method 3 — Dominance window (purely directional control)

On 5m bars:

Define rolling N-bar directional pressure:

If:
• majority of closes are higher than previous close
• highs keep expanding
• lows do not break prior leg origin

Then leg continues.

Leg ends only when directional control flips AND structural anchor is violated.

This is closer to how discretionary traders see legs.


When does one leg end and the next begin?

For a zigzag, the only meaningful answer is:

A leg ends when directional control is structurally lost.

Not when price retraces X pips.
Not when a local high forms.
Not when a 2-bar pattern appears.

Structurally lost means:

The move that was previously a pullback becomes a dominant expansion in the opposite direction.

Now let us define this in zigzag terms.

Assume we are in an up leg.

We track:

• The current leg origin (last confirmed swing low)
• The current leg extreme (highest high since origin)
• All pullbacks inside the leg

Inside the up leg:

Pullbacks are downward moves that:
– do not break the origin
– do not exceed the size of prior upward expansions in structural significance

The leg continues as long as upward expansions keep producing new highs and downward moves remain subordinate.

The zigzag reverses when:

A downward expansion:

Breaks the last structural higher low

Expands beyond the scale of prior pullbacks

Stops producing higher highs afterwards

At that moment, what was a pullback is no longer a pullback.
It becomes the first leg of the opposite direction.

That is the zigzag turning point.

Zigzag, I think, needs to be regarded as part of trade lifecycle.

Get on the leg.
Ride dominance.
Get off when dominance shifts.

That is different from defining pivots.

So:
A zigzag leg is the tradable portion of directional dominance.

Now the only two questions that matter are:
When is directional dominance established?
When is it lost?

The uncomfortable truth is this:
There is no objective zigzag that cleanly maps to “get on here, get off there” in real time without trade-offs.
If it were structurally obvious and stable, it would already be arbitraged away.

When we look back at a chart, legs are obvious.
When we are inside them, they are ambiguous.

That is not because we are missing the right rule.
It is because legs are defined retroactively by outcome.

A move only becomes a “clean leg” after:

• It extended far enough.
• It did not mean-revert immediately.
• It did not fragment into chop.

In real time, at the start, it is statistically indistinguishable from noise.
That is the core difficulty.

So the problem is not:
“How do I define zigzag without thresholds?”

The real problem is:
“How do I detect early that this move will become a leg rather than revert?”

That is a forward uncertainty problem, not a geometric one.
Every zigzag algorithm — threshold-based, fractal-based, structure-based — is just a different compromise between:
• Early entry with many false starts
• Late entry with cleaner legs
• Tight exit with whipsaws
• Loose exit with giveback

There is no clean deterministic answer hiding behind better semantics.

Something intellectually honest:

A tradable zigzag must accept that:
• Entry is probabilistic.
• Exit is reactive.
• Clean legs are visible only after survival.

Now the useful direction is not to search for the “true zigzag.”
It is to ask:
What characteristics do the legs that survive share in their first few bars?
That is the only edge available.


